---
title: 'Growing A Career as a Developer'
date: '2022-12-21'
tags: ['career']
draft: true
featuredImage: blog/css-statue.webp
summary: >
  Growing my career as a solo developer was a challenging and rewarding effort.
---

## Introduction

My first role in tech was **not** as a software developer. My first title was "Junior Graphic
Designer" in a small company of roughly 40 people.

Within 6 years my role grew to "Lead Developer / Designer" before I eventually left for a Senior
Fullstack Developer role elsewhere.

In order to make that jump, I had to learn a few things.

## Some Background

Within my first few months on board with **Recording Radio Film Connection & CASA Schools
(<a href="https://www.rrfedu.com/" target="_blank" rel="noreffer">RRFC</a>)** as Junior Graphic
Designer, it became clear that the company also had web development needs.

Not one to stay inside my comfort zone, I stepped up to offer my skills.

I had picked up some web development experience during high school and college and I was familiar
enough with HTML, CSS, JavaScript, PHP and SQL to be helpful. I began helping the resident developer
chip away at some mundane HTML template modification.

It wasn't long before I was asked to tackle larger-scale tasks.

My first larger task was to build a custom WordPress theme. I had no previous WordPress experience,
but the senior developer on the team was kind enough to show me the ropes and point me to some
learning resources. Having some background with PHP and MySQL was helpful to get me up to speed.
After several months, I became more fluent in the framework and eventually built multiple websites
for the company using WordPress.

Some years into my tenure at RRFC, I could have remained content working on custom WordPress themes
and plugins, but I yearned for more. Over the span of 8 years, my title evolved from "Junior Graphic
Designer" to "Lead Developer / Designer."

Eventually, I realized my value as a software developer and began exploring other opportunities. I
interviewed at several companies and ultimately landed a Senior Fullstack Developer role for **The
Real Deal <a href="https://www.therealdeal.com/" target="_blank" rel="noreffer">(TRD)</a>**

In this article, I list the most important life-changing decisions that I made which fueled my
growth as a professional software developer within RRFC, as well as the decisions which impacted my
ability to successfully _interview_ and land my next role at TRD.

## Internal Growth

Below are some key values which led to steady internal growth in my first position with RRFC.

### 1. Push Your Own Boundaries

All websites and applications, no matter how complex and elegant, have something in common: _people
made them._ People no different from you or me. People who worked hard, tried new things, and
perhaps got lucky.

**Everything can be created.**

_"I can't build that"_ is not a valid excuse in the modern web, where there's an incredible amount
of open source projects at our disposal, tutorials, blog posts, etc. _"I can't build that like a
team at Google can"_ _might_ be a valid excuse, but perhaps append the word _"yet"_... _"I can't
build that like a team at Google can, **yet**."_ But you should try.

If I limited myself to what I already knew, or what I'd already tried or had relative success with,
I wouldn't have grown at all.

<Aside>

#### Personal Case Study: Pushing Boundaries

Early in my tenure with RRFC, I noticed an internal software development need. The company was
relying on a 3rd-party start-up vendor for their learning management software, which was used to
provide education to hundreds of students daily. The software ran smoothly enough, but being a
school that offered electronic curriculum provided through a platform that _we had little control
of_ made me uncomfortable.

What if that company went under? What if they suddenly jacked their prices through the roof? What
did they offer which we couldn't replicate in-house?

We couldn't add our own features, many of which were needed to improve student experience and to
meet state licensing requirements.

I drafted up a well-crafted email pitch to upper management that outlined the opportunity I saw for
the company to expand their digital footprint and improve their offerings using a new software which
_we could develop for them in-house._ Something that they could **own**, extend, and rely on.

**The email was well-received,** and I was allowed to work on this project! This project ended up
spanning two years (I was the sole developer), and it became an opportunity to grow my development
skills while providing new value. It became a milestone on my resume.

</Aside>

### Stay Informed

This may go without saying for most, but it's still important enough to cover here. For my first few
years as a developer (this might sound silly), I did not know there was an actual _developer
community_ out there!

Twitter is an exceptional place to connect and interact with other professional developers - many of
whom have worked on or created the very libraries and packages you might use every day.

Podcasts were a critical part in this realization for me. I stumbled on
[syntax.fm](https://syntax.fm/) at some point, and it's been one of my favorites.

## Making a Jump

After several years within the same company, I realized I hit a ceiling for growth. There was
nowhere to grow internally, and my compensation was not going to improve.

At this point, I realized I needed to make a jump. But how?

### "I develop alone. How can level up my skills?"

When I found myself developing solo for an extensive amount of time, I began to realize the great
need to level up my skills in order to increase my worth to the company, as well as to explore new
oppotunities. Here are some steps I took to level up my skills.

None of this happened overnight. This effort spanned years. However, I can confidently pinpoint some
specific decisions made over the years which greatly impacted my career in a positive way.

Some might call it "playing the long game," and they'd be right. It's all about preparation and
steady personal growth. If you invest in yourself, opportunities will arise.
